# Chapter 3: Nullability

Safety, as we've discussed in the introduction, is a defining property of the Kotlin language. So why do we need safety guarantees from languages?

Runtime errors are the worst kind of errors: they happen while your users are interacting with your application. Compile time errors are better than runtime errors, as developers face these instead. Even better than compile time errors are edit time errors (or design time errors, if you will): not having to build the project, but seeing the error immediately when making it while writing the code. For Kotlin, the latter two classes of errors are essentially the same, as IntelliJ will show you nearly all compilation errors in real time.

To move as many errors as possible to compile time, Kotlin is...

- A statically typed language, meaning that each variable has a fixed type which is known at compile time, and doesn't change later. This allows verifications such as making sure that whatever methods are called on a variable do, in fact, exist.
- A strongly typed language, which means that values are almost never converted to other types implicitly.

>JavaScript is an excellent counter-example for both of these traits.

Another safety feature, which is perhaps the most often touted one in Kotlin, is *null safety*. This is often advertised as *"Kotlin doesn't have NullPointerExceptions!"*. While this statement is categorically false, we'll see that it kind of gets the general idea of null safety in Kotlin across.

### Problem statement

What's the problem with nulls in the first place? For example, that even this trivial Java method isn't safe:

```java
public static boolean isEmpty(String str) {
    return str.length() == 0;
}
```

If you pass in `null` as its parameter, it will throw an exception. Would you ever expect a method like this to do that?

The core problem is that you have to keep `null` in mind every time you write Java code. These are everyday questions with Java:

- Will a given method accept `null` as its parameter? Will it throw a validation exception for the parameter, or will it crash unexpectedly somewhere halfway?
- Will a given method ever return a `null` value? Do you need to check for that before you operate on it? 
- Does this field in this class ever hold `null`, or can you trust that it's always initialized?

Null checks themselves aren't the problem. It's not knowing when they're needed for certain that's the issue. You can't feasibly null check every value you ever call a function on, which means that sooner or later you'll try to do it on a `null` value. And of course, you'll only find this out at runtime, with the infamous `NullPointerException`.

Null - the absence of value - is something we need to be able to express, and [it can be you friend](https://medium.com/@elizarov/null-is-your-friend-not-a-mistake-b63ff1751dd5) if the language allows you to [deal with it safely](https://medium.com/@elizarov/dealing-with-absence-of-value-307b80534903).

### Nullability

Null safety means that each type in the Kotlin language is either nullable or non-nullable. The former allows a `null` value, while the latter forbids it. This is known at compile time, and the compiler enforces null safety.

The types we've seen so far have all been non-nullable: `Int`, `Person`, and `FileInputStream` are examples of this. You can't assign `null` to a variable of any of these types:

```kotlin
val person: Person = null
```

>e: Null can not be a value of a non-null type Person

The nullable counterparts of these types are denoted by a `?` at the end of the typename: `Int?`, `Person?`, and `FileInputStream?` are all nullable. A variable with one of these types is able to hold `null`, in addition to being able to hold a reference to an object of the given type. This code will compile:

```kotlin
var person: Person? = null
person = Person("Ann", 37)
person = null
```

>You can think of this `?` as marking uncertainty, or even a question: does a variable of type `Person?` hold an actual `Person`? Maybe. It's a `Person?`.

If you choose a nullable type, the compiler will prevent you from accidentally calling something on this reference - whether that's a method invocation, or reading a property:

```kotlin
println(person.name)
```

>e: Only safe (?.) or non-null asserted (!!.) calls are allowed on a nullable receiver of type Person?

The error message tells us that this call is not allowed, and even suggests some ways to fix the issue of trying to work on a nullable value.

Thankfully, Kotlin provides several convenient features to perform a null check. Let's start with the simplest one, an actual, explicit null check:

```kotlin
if (person != null) {
    println(person.name)
}
```

This code works, because inside the `if` statement, we receive a *smart cast*. The `person` variable's type changes from `Person?` to `Person`, and we can operate on it as usual.

### Safe calls

One of the basic ways to handle a `null` value is the safe call operator `?.`. It simply replaces the regular accessor `.` of a property access or method call:

```kotlin
println(person?.name)
```

If the operand of `?.` is `null`, it will skip the operation on it, and the entire expression (`person?.name` in the example) will just evaluate to `null`.

This operator can be chained if you have nested data models, where any of them might be `null` along the way. If this happens, the entire chain will short circuit and return `null`.

```kotlin
val street: String? = person?.company?.address?.building
```

While the safe call operator lets you make method calls safely, without the possibility of an NPE, it's not perfect:

- It will never get you a non-nullable value. Whatever values you get from a safe call will always be nullable, as the call might have been skipped.
- It can hide certain issues in your code if you use it carelessly. A call such as `service?.sendEmail()` silently skips sending the email if `service` happens to be `null`, and you don't really get to handle the error case. The safe call is shorthand for an `if-else` statement with an implicitly empty `else` branch:

    ```kotlin
    if (service != null) {
        service.sendEmail()
    } else {
        /* Do nothing */
    }
    ```

    Only use this operator if your calls are *truly* optional, and you don't mind if they don't happen.

### Elvis operator

The Elvis operator `?:` (tilt your head to the left) is a path from the nullable world to the non-nullable one. Here's how it's used:

```kotlin
val message: String? = getMessage()
val length: Int = message?.length ?: 0
```

If the value on the left side of the operator is not `null`, it will return that value. Otherwise, the Elvis expression returns the right hand side value. That's it!

This operator is often used to provide a default value of sorts if something happens to be `null`, like in the example above. It also comes in handy to throw an exception or return from a method due to a null value:

```kotlin
fun processInput() {
    while (true) {
        val input: String = readLine() ?: return
        println("Input was: $input")
    }
}
```

>The [`readLine`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/read-line.html) function from the Standard Library reads a line from the standard input stream, and returns `null` if the end of the input has been reached.

We'll look at how the evaluation and inference of types works exactly when using the Elvis operator later on, when we dive deeper into the Kotlin type system.

>Fun fact: this operator is also referred to as the [null coalescing operator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Null_coalescing_operator), and is present in many languages.

### `!!` operator

If you really want to shoot yourself in the foot, Kotlin provides you the tool to do so. The *not-null assertion operator* is a favourite of NPE lovers. It's very simple: it either returns whatever you've applied it to with a non-null type, or it throws an exception ~~(a `KotlinNullPointerException`, to be precise)~~ (a regular [`NullPointerException`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/NullPointerException.html), [since Kotlin 1.3.50](https://blog.jetbrains.com/kotlin/2019/08/kotlin-1-3-50-released/)).

```kotlin
println(person!!.name)
```

This code is equivalent to the following:

```kotlin
val person: Person? = null
if (person == null) {
    throw KotlinNullPointerException()
}
println(person.name)
```

Note that unlike the safe call operator `?.`, this operator doesn't include the `.` accessor. It can be used just on its own in an expression to force a null check / smart cast, as it will be evaluated, and throw an exception if it fails the check:

```kotlin
person!!
println(person.name) // person is smart cast to `Person` here
```

For the same reason, you'll never be able to construct an instance of a class like this one, as it will always throw an exception while it's being constructed:

```kotlin
class Episode {
    var airdate: Date = null!!
}
```

### Safe casts

We see that handling nullable values is convenient in Kotlin, since the language provides many tools for this purpose. *Safe casts* let us make use of these tools when we need to perform type checks, by transforming a question of type conformance to a question of nullability:

```kotlin
val renderable: Renderable? = entity as? Renderable
```

A safe cast performed with `as?` will either succeed and return the original value as the given type, or fail and return `null` instead. Handling this `null` value is often more convenient than performing a type check, or attempting a regular cast and catching a possible exception.

Take this slightly modified example from our game in the previous lecture, which uses a type check:

```kotlin
for (entity in entities) {
    if (entity is Renderable) {
        entity.render(canvas)
    }
}
```

We can easily rewrite this using a safe cast, and then a safe call:

```kotlin
for (entity in entities) {
    (entity as? Renderable)?.render(canvas)
}
```

Similarly, if you take this loop, with an inverted condition:

```kotlin
for (entity in entities) {
    if (entity !is Renderable) continue
    entity.render(canvas)
}
```

... you can rewrite it using a safe cast and an Elvis operator:

```kotlin
for (entity in entities) {
    val renderable = entity as? Renderable ?: continue
    renderable.render(canvas)
}
```

These may or may not be more legible than the original code for you at this point. As you get used to Kotlin and read more Kotlin code, such patterns will surely become familiar.

### lateinit

The language's strict class initialization rules require every property to be initialized when an instance is constructed. This applies to nullable properties as well, even if you're just initializing them to `null`.

However, there are several frameworks that rely on lifecycle callbacks for initialization rather than the constructor. When working with these, you may end up having to make properties nullable just because you're initializing them later than "constructor-time":

```kotlin
class MyApplication : Application() {
    private var timer: AnimationTimer? = null

    override fun start(primaryStage: Stage) {
        // Setup things
        timer = object : AnimationTimer() {
            override fun handle(now: Long) {
                // Draw stuff somewhere!
            }
        }
    }
}
```

>Here's a new use of the `object` keyword, an object expression! This is the way to create anonymous implementations of interfaces or anonymous subclasses in Kotlin. It's equivalent to using `new AnimationTimer() {}` in Java. Note the parentheses indicating the call to the superclass constructor in the Kotlin syntax.

The compiler will guarantee null safety by continuously forcing us to perform null checks of one kind or another when we interact with the `timer` property. This is inconvenient, since we know that `timer` will be initialized already, and never be `null`. Both of these calls will work, but they are both using unnecessary constructs, and introduce complexity in the code:

```kotlin
timer?.start()
timer!!.stop()
```

What's even worse is that regular null checks will not work on `timer`, as it's a class level, mutable property:

```kotlin
private var timer: AnimationTimer? = null

override fun start(primaryStage: Stage) {
    timer = object : AnimationTimer() { ... }

    if (timer != null) {
        timer.stop()
        // ^ This line doesn't compile!
    }
}
```

>e: Smart cast to 'AnimationTimer' is impossible, because 'timer' is a mutable property that could have been changed by this time

As you can see, the compiler's worry here is that the class might be used in a multithreaded environment, where a thread executing in parallel to the current one may change the value of `timer` between the `if` statement's condition being evaluated and its body executing, which could lead to an NPE.

>We'll see a neat way to perform a null check for such a `var` later on.

The solution for this is the `lateinit` keyword. This can be used to indicate to the compiler that you, the developer, will bear the responsibility of initializing a property or variable before you start using it. In turn, the compiler will stop worrying about it, and let you use it freely. Using this keyword is the equivalent of turning the safety off, but it's appropriate and useful in situations like these.

Adding it to `timer` lets us make it non-nullable (in fact, `lateinit` declarations can not be nullable), and use it freely:

```kotlin
class MyApplication : Application() {
    private lateinit var timer: AnimationTimer

    override fun start(primaryStage: Stage) {
        timer = object : AnimationTimer() {
            override fun handle(now: Long) {
                // Draw stuff somewhere!
            }
        }

        timer.start()
        timer.stop()
    }
}
```

What happens if you fail to initialize such a property in time? You'll get a nicely formatted `UninitializedPropertyAccessException`, with a message like this:

>lateinit property timer has not been initialized

If you ever forget to set a `lateinit` variable in time, this is still more useful for tracking down the issue than getting a generic NPE.

### Java interop, platform types

Kotlin prides itself on interoperability with the native languages and tools of whatever platform you're running it on. Since Java doesn't have a language level concept of nullability, how can Kotlin's strict null handling be reconciled with going back and forth between the two languages?

##### Kotlin to Java interop

By default, declarations coming from Java have _platform types_. This means that their nullability is just... Unknown. ¯\\_(ツ)_/¯

For example, consider this class, which - like most Java code - contains no nullability information. This is true about the data it's storing, as well as its constructor parameter. Both of these will have the platform type of `String!` when looking at them from Kotlin. Platform types are *non-denotable*, meaning that while they're a part of the language, they can not be used directly in source code. They will only show up in IDE hints and compiler messages.

```java
public class JavaTest {
    String platform;

    public JavaTest(String platform) {
        this.platform = platform;
    }
}
```

Whenever we use this class from Kotlin, we are free to pass in either a nullable or non-nullable value as the constructor parameter:

```kotlin
val test1 = JavaTest(null)
val test2 = JavaTest("string")
```

We're also allowed to either perform null handling when we read the value of `platform`, or not:

```kotlin
val test = JavaTest(null)
println(test.platform.length)
println(test.platform?.length)
```

When we work with platform types, our null safety drops to the level of safety that Java provides. We either perform null checks when something may be null, or we won't, and we crash with an NPE.

This seems like a major blow for Kotlin's null safety - and, well, it is. This is the cost of interoperating with a language that inherently doesn't care about nullability, and you'll have to keep it in mind whenever you call a Java based API. You can hope for the best and just use values that have platform types directly, you can treat all of them as if they were nullable (though the Kotlin compiler won't enforce this), or you can try to balance the two somehow.

>Fun fact: in early stages of the interop design, _everything_ coming from Java was considered nullable, and had to be checked or handled accordingly. While super safe, this quickly turned out to be unfeasible in practice, and was replaced by platform types.

A good idea is to make your choices about how you treat something with a platform type explicit, by not letting the compiler infer platform types for variables. Instead of this, which creates a variable with the type `String!`:

```kotlin
val str = test.platform
```

You should choose one of these, which essentially documents whether you thought this value was nullable or not:

```kotlin
val str1: String = test.platform
val str2: String? = test.platform
```

If you choose the former, and `platform` does happen to be `null`, you'll get an exception immediately here, at the assignment. This is much easier to track down if it happens than giving it a platform type, and crashing later down the line, when you try to actually use it.

>The bytecode performing the check is interesting to take a look at!

##### Nullability support from Java

So what's the solution for existing code that's written in Java, and all the libraries in the JVM ecosystem? How can they aid Kotlin's null safety?

The ultimate solution is to _"just"_ migrate that code to Kotlin, and while [this has been done](https://cashapp.github.io/2019-06-26/okhttp-4-goes-kotlin), it's certainly not feasible for all of the code in every project. You can still be a good citizen even if you're maintaining Java APIs though, thanks to the Kotlin compiler's support for [nullability annotations](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/java-interop.html#nullability-annotations).

These have been slowly gaining adoption in Java over the years, and several sets of them exist. There's a JSR implementation, and Lombok, Android, and of course JetBrains have their own. Each slightly different, each in different packages. The Kotlin compiler supports all of the ones mentioned and more, see [here](https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/blob/master/core/descriptors.jvm/src/org/jetbrains/kotlin/load/java/JvmAnnotationNames.kt) for the up-to-date list.

We'll use the JetBrains flavour of these annotations for the examples here. Using these, you can annotate your types like such:

```java
public class JavaTest {
    @Nullable
    String nullable;
    @NotNull
    String notNull;
}
```

If you're using an IDE that supports these annotations, you'll see a warning on `notNull` here immediately, as it's not initialized by the implicit, empty constructor, and is therefore `null` when an instance of this class is created. 

>This code will still compile, however. These annotations are not enforced by the compiler in Java!

This can be fixed by adding a proper constructor:

```java
public class JavaTest {
    @Nullable
    String nullable;
    @NotNull
    String notNull;

    public JavaTest(@Nullable String nullable, @NotNull String notNull) {
        this.nullable = nullable;
        this.notNull = notNull;
    }
}
```

These annotations will be picked up when using this class from Kotlin, which means that the constructor will have a `String?` and a `String` parameter. You'll be forced to perform a `null` check when you try using `nullable`, and the compiler will warn you that a `null` check is unnecessary if you add one for `notNull`.

```kotlin
val test = JavaTest(null, "string")

println(test.nullable.length) // e: Only safe (?.) or non-null asserted (!!.) calls are allowed on a nullable receiver of type String?
println(test.nullable?.length) // ok

println(test.notNull.length) // ok
println(test.notNull?.length) // w: Unnecessary safe call on a non-null receiver of type String
```

These annotations are trusted by the compiler, but unlike Kotlin's type nullability, they aren't actually verified. You can very easily write and compile code like this, as it only shows an IDE warning:

```java
@NotNull
String getData() {
    return null;
}
```

It's your responsibility that you annotate your APIs correctly with these annotations.

Providing these annotations makes the lives of both your Java and Kotlin clients easier, and if you are maintaining a Java API, you should definitely make use of them.

>In the Android community, the adoption of these annotations escalated quickly as Kotlin gained more and more popularity.

##### Java to Kotlin interop

What about the other direction, calling Kotlin code from Java? If you are using an IDE that understands nullability annotations in pure Java code, it will likely also pick up Kotlin nullability information, as the compiler injects these annotations into the bytecode produced from Kotlin sources.

Yet again, this won't be enforced when compiling Java code against a Kotlin API, but it will be present for you as extra information when you're writing your Java code, letting you code safer.

### Nullable basic types

Basic types (such as `Int`) are represented as a primitive at the bytecode level whenever possible. For example, the parameter of this function will be a primitive:

```kotlin
fun calculate(x: Int) { ... }
```

Decompiled, we'd be looking at code like this:

```java
void calculate(int x) { ... }
```

However, if we use a nullable type, the boxed variants of basic types will have to be used instead. Since primitives are not reference types, they can't hold `null` as their value.

```kotlin
fun configure(x: Int?) { ... }
```

Decompiled, we'll see the boxed type, which allows us to potentially pass `null` into this function:

```java
void configure(@Nullable Integer x) { ... }
```

### Runtime checks

Until now, we've talked about the compile time checks that are performed to grant null safety. These, however, aren't quite enough on their own. When you're calling into Kotlin from Java, you can easily pass in `null` for a parameter that's declared as non-nullable, and the implementation of the method won't be prepared for this.

As an example, let's take this method that takes a `String` as a parameter, and prints its characters line by line. It also modifies some state at the start and end of the method, which prevents multiple invocations printing two strings at the same time (let's ignore the threading issues with setting a regular `Boolean` flag here).

```kotlin
var printing = false

fun printCharacters(str: String) {
    if (printing) return
    printing = true

    for (c in str) {
        println(c)
    }

    printing = false
}
```

You can easily pass in `null` as the parameter, if you call this method from Java:

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    Printer().printCharacters(null);
}
```

This would cause an exception when the `for` loop attempts to iterate it, and leave your application in a broken state - never being able to print anything again. (Assuming that you've handled the exception, and the method has a chance to be called again.)

To prevent this kind of unexpected failure, caused by the presumed safety that you had when you implemented the Kotlin method, the compiler performs additional null checks at runtime, by injecting code during compilation. These pieces of code, again, can be found by decompiling the bytecode:

```java
public final void printCharacters(@NotNull String str) {
    Intrinsics.checkParameterIsNotNull(str, "str");
    if (!printing) {
        printing = true;
        /* ... For loop ... */
        printing = false;
    }
}
```

Since these checks are performed immediately at the beginning of the function, before any of your code is executed, it's as if the incorrect call never even happened. This prevents leaving your application in an unexpected, invalid state by cancelling execution somewhere deep within your method.

These kinds of null checks, and many other utility methods are contained by the [`Intrinsics`](https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/blob/master/libraries/stdlib/jvm/runtime/kotlin/jvm/internal/Intrinsics.java) class. You'll see static calls to it all over decompiled bytecode: for values of parameters and fields, return values, when using the `!!` operator or `lateinit` variables, and more.

It's also worth noting that these checks will generate nicely formatted, specific exception messages, which is why you'll see identifiers, and sometimes even longer pieces of code being passed into them as strings.

# Summary

Nullability is a core part of Kotlin's type system. Types are all nullable or non-nullable. When operating on nullable values, the compiler enforces performing null checks.

Safe calls `?.` skip calls to methods if the reference they were (would have been) invoked on was `null`. The Elvis operator `?:` yields its left hand value if that's not `null`, and the right hand value otherwise. The `!!` operator is a quick way to throw an NPE.

`lateinit` takes the responsibility of checking nullability out of the compiler's hand, and is useful when working with frameworks.

Safe casts `as?` allow rewriting type checks to nullability problems.

By default, Java declarations show up with platform types in Kotlin, which are unsafe to use. This can be improved upon by using nullability annotations.

# Sources

- [Null is your friend, not a mistake - Roman Elizarov](https://medium.com/@elizarov/null-is-your-friend-not-a-mistake-b63ff1751dd5)
- [Dealing with absence of value - Roman Elizarov](https://medium.com/@elizarov/dealing-with-absence-of-value-307b80534903)
- Official documentation:
  - [Nullability](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/null-safety.html)
  - [Calling Java from Kotlin](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/java-interop.html#null-safety-and-platform-types)
  - [Calling Kotlin from Java](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/java-to-kotlin-interop.html#null-safety)