# Chapter 7: Standard Library Showcase

The Kotlin Standard Library contains a vast amount of useful functions. This includes various utilities (some of which we've already seen), as well as extensions for many common types that makes working with them a lot easier than by using their original APIs. In this chapter, we'll look at some small helper functions used to describe preconditions, and then two commonly used groups of extensions, for the `String` and `File` types.

Finally, to put what we've learned about collection processing earlier into practice, we'll perform some processing on an interesting data set - crime statistics from Chicago.

## Preconditions

Whenever we define a function, we list the parameters that it takes, and the types of these parameters. This, however, is not quite enough to describe the _contract_ of a function. We might also want to specify how and when the function may be called. We might place a restriction on the current state of the application, or the values of the arguments that are being passed in. To look at how Kotlin helps us clearly state these expectations, we'll use a simple `Reader` interface:

```kotlin
interface Reader {
    fun open()
    fun close()
    fun readBytes(byteCount: Int): ByteArray
}
```

We'll implement a `FileReader` based on this interface, which can read the contents of a given file:

```kotlin
class FileReader(private val fileName: String) : Reader {

    private var inputStream: FileInputStream? = null

    override fun open() {
        inputStream = FileInputStream(File(fileName))
    }

    override fun close() {
        inputStream?.close()
        inputStream = null
    }

    override fun readBytes(byteCount: Int): ByteArray {
        val arr = ByteArray(byteCount)
        inputStream!!.read(arr)
        return arr    
    }

}
```

The reader can be initialized with a filename, and uses a [`FileInputStream`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/io/FileInputStream.html) to read from that file.

If we take a good look at `readBytes` method, we can find a couple of issues in it:

- There is a use of the `!!` operator here, which will result in a `NullPointerException` if the `open` method hasn't been called yet. Not exactly friendly behaviour.
- The other issue is less obvious: if a negative value is passed in as the parameter, we'll attempt to allocate an array with a negative length, which is invalid, and also produces an exception.

How can we make sure that these things don't happen? For starters, documenting these methods might be a good idea:

```kotlin
/**
 * Opens the reader. Every call to this method
 * must be followed by a call to [close] to
 * free up underlying resources, when the
 * reader is no longer being used.
 */
fun open()

/**
 * Closes the reader, freeing up any resources
 * associated with it.
 */
fun close()

/**
 * Reads bytes from the reader. The reader must
 * be open for this operation.
 * 
 * @param byteCount The number of bytes to read.
 *                  Must be a positive number.
 */
fun readBytes(byteCount: Int): ByteArray
```

> Kotlin's documentation format is called [KDoc](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/kotlin-doc.html). Its syntax is very similar to JavaDoc, but it extends it with Markdown support and some additional block tags that are Kotlin-specific (e.g. `@property`). [Dokka](https://github.com/Kotlin/dokka) may be used to generate documentation from Kotlin code comments.

This, of course, makes us reliant on everyone reading the documentation for our interface, and if the methods are used incorrectly, they'll still result in ugly exceptions. To fix this, we'll use two functions from the Standard Library to codify our requirements for the `readBytes` method: `check` and `require`.

>What we're doing here falls in line with another item of *Effective Java*: *Item 49: Check parameters for validity*. There's also a corresponding item in the [*Effective Kotlin*](https://leanpub.com/effectivekotlin) book: *Item 5: Specify your expectations on arguments and state*.

[`check`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/check.html) is meant to ensure that our application is in the state that we expect it to be in. What we want to check in this case is that our `inputStream` is non-null:

```kotlin
override fun readBytes(byteCount: Int): ByteArray {
    val input = inputStream
    check(input != null) { "Reader must be opened first" }

    val arr = ByteArray(byteCount)
    input.read(arr)
    return arr
}
```

This call will throw an `IllegalStateException` with the given message if its parameter doesn't evaluate to `true`. As a bonus, thanks to [a certain advanced language feature](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/whatsnew13.html#contracts), the compiler can infer that the `check` function not throwing an exception means that `input` was not null, and gives us a smart cast from `FileInputStream?` to `FileInputStream`, which lets us get rid of the usage of `!!`.

Similarly, we can use [`require`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/require.html) to state our expectations about the method's parameter:

```kotlin
require(byteCount > 0) { "Byte count has to be a positive number (was $byteCount)" }
```

You might have noticed that the second parameter of these functions is not just a regular `String` - it's a lambda that returns a `String`. Why is this useful? This way, if the message has to be constructed (for example, concatenated together from multiple pieces, to include values of variables in it, like above), this computation won't happen on the happy path. If we were passing in a `String` as the parameter, we'd always have to format the error message before performing the check - unnecessarily, most of the time. The indirection that a lambda offers allows us to do this work lazily.

>You might ask: doesn't a lambda allocation's cost outweigh the gains of not assembling these `String`s? Take a look at the implementation of these functions to figure out why that's not an issue (but try to guess first!).

Notice how having these checks and requirements at the very top of our method makes them very easy to read if someone navigates to the source code. They are also clearly separated from the actual implementation of the method.

```kotlin
override fun readBytes(byteCount: Int): ByteArray {
    val input = inputStream
    check(input != null) { "Reader must be opened first" }
    require(byteCount > 0) { "Byte count has to be a positive number (was $byteCount)" }

    val arr = ByteArray(byteCount)
    input.read(arr)
    return arr
}
```

These checks that we've added are very similar to the [runtime null checks](./3.md#runtime-checks) added by the Kotlin compiler for nullable parameters, and they serve the same purpose: they prevent executing the implementation inside the method completely if given preconditions fail, instead of allowing an unexpected crash somewhere down the line.

> Handling exceptions in a way that leaves the application in a healthy state is actually yet another piece of advice from Effective Java: *Item 76: Strive for failure atomicity*.

> The `open` method also has a bug: if called multiple times without `close` being called, we'll lose references to open `FileInputStream` instances, thus leaking resources. Fix this bug using the helpers we've just learned about!

## Strings

When we're using strings in Kotlin, we're using the `kotlin.String` type - but under the hood, this is nothing but a `java.lang.String`. This is another example example of a [mapped type](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/java-interop.html#mapped-types). We are using the regular Java `String` at the bytecode level and at runtime, but at the source level, we see it through a different interface.

This interface has some slight changes from the Java variant (for example, `length` is a property, while it used to be a function), and is generally very barebones. Lots of the functionality that we can find right inside the `java.lang.String` class is missing. There's no `isEmpty`, `indexOf`, `toLowerCase`, and so on. Not even constructors!

```kotlin
package kotlin

public class String : Comparable<String>, CharSequence {
    companion object {}

    public operator fun plus(other: Any?): String
    public override val length: Int
    public override fun get(index: Int): Char
    public override fun subSequence(startIndex: Int, endIndex: Int): CharSequence
    public override fun compareTo(other: String): Int
}
```

Worry not, we're just looking at another example of [extension oriented design](./4.md#extension-oriented-design) here. The class contains only the very essential functionality that it needs to (e.g. `get`, `length`, or `plus`), and everything else is implemented on top of this as extensions.

```kotlin
println("".isEmpty()) // true
println("kitten".isEmpty()) // false
println("kitten".indexOf('t')) // 2
println("KitTeN".toLowerCase()) // "kitten"
```

And not only is the base functionality of `java.util.String` provided as extensions, there's much, much more in terms of useful functions:

```kotlin
println("".isNotEmpty()) // false
println("   \t   \n\t ".isBlank()) // true
println("   word       ".isNotBlank()) // true
println("kitten".lastIndexOf('t')) // 3
println("kitten".capitalize()) // "Kitten"
println("   kitten     ".trim()) // "kitten"
println("kitten".reversed()) // "nettik"
```

>A `String` is considered "blank" by these APIs if it only contains whitespace.

There's one more thing missing from the `kotlin.String` class: constructors. They are replaced by top level factory functions, which use the widespread Kotlin convention of being named after the class that they're creating, making them look just like real constructors:

```kotlin
public inline fun String(chars: CharArray): String
public inline fun String(bytes: ByteArray): String

String(charArrayOf('a', 'b', 'c'))
String(byteArrayOf(0x68, 0x65, 0x78))
```

### Raw strings

A handy language feature that we didn't cover yet is [*raw strings*](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/basic-types.html#string-literals). A raw string is bounded by `"""` (triple quotation marks on each end), and it can contain nearly any character. This includes those that usually have special meaning inside a `String`, such as `\`,  as well as newlines.

>String templates, using `$`, are still available within raw strings, and they are evaluated as expected.

```kotlin
val map = """
    X X
     X 
    X X
"""
```

Printing the value of `map` above will print the following:

```

    X X
     X 
    X X

```

Both the newlines at the start and end of the string are present, as well as the indentation at the start of each line.

The Standard Library makes using multi-line strings even easier, by letting you manage the whitespace at the start of each line, to keep your code neatly formatted. To remove the smallest amount of common whitespace from the start of each line, you can use [`trimIndent`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/trim-indent.html):

```kotlin
val map = """
    X X
     X 
    X X
""".trimIndent()
```

This makes our output a lot nicer:

```
X X
 X
X X
```

Another similar function is [`trimMargin`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/trim-margin.html), which will remove whitespace and the first occurance of a given prefix character (`|`, by default) from each line:

```kotlin
val map = """
        |X X
        | X
        |X X
""".trimMargin()
```

In our example, this achieves this output again:

```
X X
 X
X X
```

These two functions might seem like they perform expensive computations - and they do. However, if you're using them on `String` instances that are constant at compile time, the calls to these functions will be optimized away during compilation.

## Files

Let's move on to dealing with files, through the [`java.io.File`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/io/File.html) class. Kotlin doesn't replace or map this class to another, but it augments it in many ways.

### Browsing files

The first functions we'll look at help us find the files that we want to work on. The `File` class represents both files and directories in the file system. Given a `File` that points to a directory, we can start a *walk* on the file tree from that node:

```kotlin
val walk: FileTreeWalk = file.walk()
```

A [`FileTreeWalk`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/-file-tree-walk/index.html) is actually a `Sequence<File>` (with some cool extra options), which will enumerate all files (and directories) under the given directory.

This is a powerful API, since we can use any `Sequence` operations on this walk. For example, we can print the names of all files that have `IMG` in their name and have the `jpg` extension, in any subdirectory of the current one:

```kotlin
walk.filter { it.isFile }
        .filter { it.nameWithoutExtension.contains("IMG") }
        .filter { it.extension.equals("jpg", ignoreCase = true) }
        .forEach { file ->
            println(file.name)
        }
```

>[`nameWithoutExtension`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/java.io.-file/name-without-extension.html) and [`extension`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/java.io.-file/extension.html) are both *extensions* (pardon the pun) on the `File` class. You can also see a handy overload of [`String#equals`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/equals.html) at work here, allowing you to ignore case differences.

### Reading and writing files

For read/write operations on a single file, let's start with an example in Java style, which reads lines from a file, and collects them into a `List<String>` (this example omits exception handling):

```kotlin
val file = File("filename")
val lines = mutableListOf<String>()
val reader = BufferedReader(FileReader(file))
var line: String? = reader.readLine()
while (line != null) {
    lines.add(line)
    line = reader.readLine()
}
reader.close()
```

Kotlin makes opening a file for reading or writing very simple with extensions. You can use these to open a stream for a file, or to access even higher level APIs, such as various readers and writers.

```kotlin
file.inputStream() // FileInputStream
file.outputStream() // FileOutputStream

file.reader() // InputStreamReader
file.bufferedReader() // BufferedReader

file.writer() // OutputStreamWriter
file.bufferedWriter() // BufferedWriter
file.printWriter() // PrintWriter
```

If you use these APIs, it's your responsibility to free these resources when you're done using them. Remember that you have the `use` function in the Standard Library that can do this for you safely. This function returns whatever the lambda passed to it returns, and closes the opened resource:

```kotlin
val lines = file.bufferedReader().use { reader ->
    val lines = mutableListOf<String>()
    var line: String? = reader.readLine()
    while (line != null) {
        lines.add(line)
        line = reader.readLine()
    }   
    lines
}
```

To simplify this snippet, you can also use [`forEachLine`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/java.io.-file/for-each-line.html), which runs a given action for each line in a file:

```kotlin
val lines = mutableListOf<String>()
file.forEachLine { lines.add(it) }
```

This function will open a `BufferedReader` on the given file, read its contents - performing your actions for each line - and then safely close the reader.

And then there's also an even simpler way...

```kotlin
val lines: List<String> = file.readLines()
```

Creating a list of `String` instances in memory for an entire file may be a costly operation, if your file contains a large amount of data. If you don't need all of its contents to be loaded in memory at once (for example, if you can process them all individually, just on their own), you can use a lazy `Sequence` instead, with the help of [`useLines`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/java.io.-file/use-lines.html).

Here's an example of calculating the average length of a line, using the `Sequence` API. This will pull in the lines of the file one by one during the processing, instead of all at once.

```kotlin
val avg: Double = file.useLines { lines: Sequence<String> ->
    lines.map { it.length }.average()
}
```

If you want to operate simply on the entire text content of a file, the Standard Library also has you covered: the [`readText`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/java.io.-file/read-text.html) extension will give you the entire contents of the file as a single `String`, and the [`writeText`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/java.io.-file/write-text.html) extension can be used to set a file's content to a `String`. Again, these wrap various operations with file streams.

## The crimes of the windy city

To put our knowledge of file handling, string manipulation, and collection processing to the test, we'll perform some simple analysis on [freely available crime statistics from Chicago](https://data.world/publicsafety/chicago-crime).

The data set consists of three files, containing the stats from the years 2014, 2015, and 2016. The files are [CSVs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values), and they contain data like this:

```
id,case_number,date,block,iucr,primary_type,description,location_description,arrest,domestic,beat,district,ward,community_area,fbi_code,latitude,longitude,location
9446824,HX100141,2014-01-01T02:00:00,0000X W ILLINOIS ST,0460,BATTERY,SIMPLE,STREET,false,false,1831,18,42,8,08B,41.890828047,-87.630234746,POINT(-87.630234746 41.890828047)
9446748,HX100020,2014-01-01T00:00:00,006XX N DEARBORN ST,0890,THEFT,FROM BUILDING,BAR OR TAVERN,false,false,1832,18,42,8,06,41.893541578,-87.629701805,POINT(-87.629701805 41.893541578)
9446758,HX100030,2014-01-01T00:30:00,052XX W RACE AVE,1310,CRIMINAL DAMAGE,TO PROPERTY,APARTMENT,false,false,1523,15,28,25,14,41.890046233,-87.756333158,POINT(-87.756333158 41.890046233)
9446760,HX100027,2014-01-01T00:30:00,053XX W WELLINGTON AVE,0460,BATTERY,SIMPLE,APARTMENT,true,false,2514,25,31,19,08B,41.935011125,-87.759739272,POINT(-87.759739272 41.935011125)
```

To get started, we'll need to get references to all of these files. Assuming that they're in a `data` folder, we can get a `List<File>` containing each file like this:

```kotlin
val years = listOf("2014", "2015", "2016")
val filenames = years.map { year -> "data/chicago_crime_$year.csv" }
val files = filenames.map { name -> File(name) }
```

Of course, we can use chained calls instead of declaring a new variable every time:

```kotlin
val files: List<File> = listOf("2014", "2015", "2016")
        .map { year -> "data/chicago_crime_$year.csv" }
        .map { name -> File(name) }
```

We'll perform all of our analysis in-memory for simplicity, however, refactoring this code to use the `Sequence` APIs instead would greatly improve its performance. We'll fetch all lines of each file, drop the header line containing the column names, and then collect all these lines into a single `List`. `flatMap` is the perfect operator to use here:

```kotlin
val allLines: List<String> = files.flatMap { file ->
    file.readLines().drop(1)
}
```

Our data is hard to reason about when it's in a single `String` for each record. We'll create instances of a class from each line instead:

```kotlin
val crimes: List<Crime> = allLines.map { Crime(it.split(",")) }
```

>Splitting a line in a CSV file on the `,` character is a very common practice, but it is incorrect. A single field in a CSV file may contain commas if it's surrounded by quotation marks (e.g. `"SCHOOL, PUBLIC, BUILDING"`), and the naive split on the `,` character parses such fields incorrectly. We're going to sweep this under the rug here by simply ignoring it, as correctly parsing a CSV file would be too tedious. As a result, we'll have *some* incorrect data after parsing, but this won't affect our results too much.

Let's create the `Crime` class, which will have fields that each correspond to a given column of the input data:

```kotlin
class Crime(data: List<String>) {
    val id: String = data[0]
    val caseNumber: String = data[1]
    val date: LocalDateTime = data[2].toLocalDateTime()
    val block: String = data[3]
    val type: String = data[5]
    val description: String = data[6]
    val locationDescription: String = data[7]
    val arrest: Boolean = data[8].toBoolean()
    val domestic: Boolean = data[9].toBoolean()
    val latitude: Double? = data[16].toDoubleOrNull()
    val longitude: Double? = data[17].toDoubleOrNull()
}
```

This class takes the `List<String>` produced by splitting the line, and then converts the `String` representing each field to a more concrete data type, using Standard Library functions.

The only conversion function not provided to us is the `toLocalDateTime` conversion. We'll implement this ourselves. Dates in our data are in the ISO 8601 local date-time format, for example: `2014-01-18T15:52:00`. We can easily obtain each of these number values with the following `String` operations:

```kotlin
private fun String.toLocalDateTime(): LocalDateTime {
    val date = this.substringBefore('T').split('-').map { it.toInt() }
    val time = this.substringAfter('T').split(':').map { it.toInt() }

    return LocalDateTime.of(date[0], date[1], date[1], time[0], time[1], time[2])
}
```

This code works, but the hardcoded indices for the various components of the date and time are hard to read and error-prone. Did you notice the mistake in them?

We can make our code much more legible by using *destructuring declarations* again. We've seen that we can do this for data classes - the good news is that the `List` type also supports it (more details on this in the very next chapter). When destructuring a `List`, we can grab the first N elements of it, up to five of them. This cleans up our code like this:

```kotlin
private fun String.toLocalDateTime(): LocalDateTime {
    val (year, month, day) = this.substringBefore('T').split('-').map { it.toInt() }
    val (hour, minute, second) = this.substringAfter('T').split(':').map { it.toInt() }

    return LocalDateTime.of(year, month, day, hour, minute, second)
}
```

And while that was fun to perform on our own, `LocalDateTime` actually contains parsing functionality that we can rely on instead of having to write it ourselves:

```kotlin
private inline fun String.toLocalDateTime() = LocalDateTime.parse(this)
```

With that, we have a `List<Crime>` to work with. Let's answer some questions.

#### How many crimes do we have data about in total?

This is simple enough, we just need the size of the list!

```kotlin
println("# of crimes: ${crimes.size}") // # of crimes: 754541
```

#### What percentage of reports resulted in an arrest?

This information is contained in the `Boolean` property called `arrest`. We simply need to count the number of arrests made, and divide with the total number of crimes. We'll use `count` for this:

```kotlin
val ratio: Double = crimes.count { it.arrest }.toDouble() / crimes.size
println("Arrest percentage: ${ratio * 100}%") // Arrest percentage: 24.438565962618334%
```

>Notice how we've converted the count to a `Double` value before dividing it. Otherwise, we'd have performed integer division, and most likely ended up with a `0` value.

Another interesting (though quite inefficient) way of calculating this ratio would've been to map each `Boolean` value to either `0` or `1`, and then average those values:

```kotlin
val ratio = crimes.map { if (it.arrest) 1 else 0 }.average()
```

#### How many cannabis related arrests happened between 1 AM and 6 AM, on the CTA?

This is a job for the `filter` operation, as each condition we have can be described with an appropriate filter:

```kotlin
val result = crimes
        .filter { it.arrest }
        .filter { it.date.hour in 1..5 }
        .filter { it.locationDescription.contains("cta", ignoreCase = true) }
        .filter { it.description.contains("cannabis", ignoreCase = true) }
        .count()
println("CTA cannabis arrests at night $result")
```

Having this many filters doesn't look very efficient. What can we do to optimize this?

- First, we could consider which ones are likely to exclude a lot of elements, and run those filters first. If the first steps get rid of *most* records, the rest of the steps have to inspect a lot fewer of them. We might also want to pull expensive filters (for example, our `String` search operations) to later down the line, and let the quicker filters be performed first (notice that we've already done this!).
- Using a single `filter` with all the conditions joined together by `&&` operators would iterate our original `List` just once, and only create a single new `List` that contains the elements that made it through. The original code iterates the current `List` and creates an intermediate `List` in each `filter`.
- If we want to keep the structure of separate filters for each condition, using the `Sequence` API might be a good idea here. All we have to do is add an `asSequence` call at the top of the chain.

Do these actually improve our performance? Here are some *very* unscientific measurements of these approaches, on just one machine:

```
Original code
16.011 ms

Merged filter operations
18.204 ms

Converted to a Sequence
29.704 ms

Filters in the wrong order, String operations first
112.203 ms
```

These results might be surprising, as the proposed improvements sounded great in theory. The lessons to learn here: always benchmark code that you want to optimize for performance, with real amounts of data. Don't use measurements such as `System.currentTimeMillis()` either, use real benchmarking tools instead. Here's [an article](https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/articles/java/architect-benchmarking-2266277.html) and [a tutorial](https://www.baeldung.com/java-microbenchmark-harness) that can help you get started with benchmarking on the JVM.

>Note that we didn't inspect or compare the memory usage of each approach, which probably also shows significant differences.

#### What are the most common types of crimes?

We have a property called `type`, which contains values such as `NARCOTICS`, `BATTERY`, or `WEAPONS VIOLATION`. One of the frequently used collection functions in Kotlin is [`groupingBy`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/grouping-by.html), which lets us group our elements by some key. To group our crimes by their type, we can do the following:

```kotlin
val grouping: Grouping<Crime, String> = crimes.groupingBy { it.type }
```

A grouping is very similar to a `Map`, but like a `Sequence`, creating it doesn't trigger processing yet. We need to call a further terminating method on it. One of these is [`eachCount`](), which is exactly what we need:

```kotlin
val counts: Map<String, Int> = crimes
        .groupingBy { it.type }
        .eachCount()
println(counts)
```

Printing the `Map` we have here will give us an output formatted like this. Readable, but not pretty:

```
{BATTERY=140287, THEFT=168404, CRIMINAL DAMAGE=82038, WEAPONS VIOLATION=9302, ...}
```

Here's the operations we'll perform on the `Map`:

```kotlin
crimes.groupingBy { it.type }
        .eachCount()
        .mapKeys { it.key.toLowerCase().capitalize() } // 1
        .toList() // 2
        .sortedByDescending { (type, count) -> count } // 3
        .take(3) // 4
        .forEach { (type, count) -> // 5
            println("$type: $count")
        }
```

1. We modify the `Map`'s keys so that only their first letter capitalized. This "map" operation doesn't change the values in the `Map` entries, it just replaces their keys.
2. We convert our `Map<String, Int>` to a `List<Pair<String, Int>>`. Each `Pair` in the `List` will correspond to a key-value pair from the `Map`.
3. We sort the `List` so that it starts with the types of crimes that have the largest `count` values. We use another form of destructuring here: we are declaring two variables local to the lamda's scope, which will be initialized by destructuring the `Pair<String, Int>` that it receives as a parameter.
4. We take the first 3 entries of the `List`.
5. Again, we use destructuring to create variables from the `Pair<String, Int>` that we receive as the parameter of this lambda.

>A `List` is easier to follow than a `Sequence`, but a `Sequence` would have probably been a good choice here, due to the many steps and large amount of data. Try replacing `toList` with an `asSequence` call!

This will give us the following output:

```
Theft: 168404
Battery: 140287
Criminal damage: 82038
```

#### What time of the day are these crimes committed?

This, again, will be a job for `groupingBy`. After creating our grouping, we'll use [`toSortedMap`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/to-sorted-map.html) to make sure that our values are ordered by their keys (the hour), and then iterate over them.

```kotlin
crimes.groupingBy { it.date.hour }
        .eachCount()
        .toSortedMap()
        .forEach { (hour, count) ->
            val hourString = String.format("%2dh", hour)
            val percentage = (count.toDouble() / crimes.size * 100).toInt()
            println("$hourString ${"X".repeat(percentage)}")
        }
```

Inside the `forEach` call, we format the hour value, and calculate what percentage of crimes each hour contained. To visualize this primitively, we draw a barchart of sorts from `X` characters, using the [`repeat`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/repeat.html) extension:

```
 0h XXXX
 1h XX
 2h XX
 3h XX
 4h X
 5h X
 6h X
 7h XX
 8h XXX
 9h XXXX
 ...
```

# Summary

The Kotlin Standard Library contains hundreds of useful functions that make everyday tasks quicker and easier. Whether it's providing clear requirements, manipulating strings, or accessing files, the Standard Library's got you covered.

>The implementations of all of these functions are worth browsing, as they demonstrate excellent use of Kotlin's language features, as well as great API design.

Combining these quick-to-use extensions, Kotlin can be put to work as a scripting language of sorts - whether or not it's being used with its scripting environment.

# Sources

- [Effective Java - Joshua Bloch](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Effective-Java-Joshua-Bloch-ebook/dp/B078H61SCH/)
  - *The* book for writing better Java (and OO) code.
- [Effective Kotlin - Marcin Moskala](https://leanpub.com/effectivekotlin)
  - A collection of Kotlin best practices.
- Official documentation:
  - [The `kotlin.text` package](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/index.html)
  - [The `kotlin.io` package](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.io/index.html)
